>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY MAY 16: U.S.
COMMANDOS ON THE GROUND IN SYRIA
KILL A TOP ISIS LEADER; THE
UNITED STATES LOSES ONE KEY
WEAPON IN THE WAR ON DRUGS;
AND, IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
IS IT SAFE TO CONTROL THE SPREAD
OF DISEASE WITH GENETICALLY-
MODIFIED MOSQUITOES?
>> THE DANGER OF THIS TECHNOLOGY
IS EXCEPTIONALLY LOW.
>> I DON'T WANT MY KIDS TO BE
LABORATORY RATS.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WE BEGIN TONIGHT WITH NEWS IN
THE FIGHT AGAINST ISIS.
LATE LAST NIGHT, PRESIDENT OBAMA
AUTHORIZED A RARE AND SUCCESSFUL
GROUND RAID INTO EASTERN SYRIA.
THE WHITE HOUSE SAYS U.S.
COMMANDOS KILLED A SENIOR
ISLAMIC STATE LEADER, CAPTURED
HIS WIFE AND CONFISCATED ISIS
COMPUTER DATA IN AL-AMR.
OFFICIALS SAY ISIS SENIOR LEADER
ABU SAYYAF WAS INVOLVED IN
MILITARY OPERATIONS AND OVERSAW
ILLICIT OIL AND GAS OPERATIONS,
FUNDING TERRORIST ATTACKS.
HIS WIFE, UMM SAYYAF, IS ALSO
ACCUSED OF PLAYING AN IMPORTANT
ROLE IN TERRORIST ATTACKS AND
MAY HAVE HELPED ENSLAVE A WOMAN
WHO WAS RESCUED IN LAST NIGHT'S
RAID.
SAYYAF'S WIFE IS BEING DETAINED
IN IRAQ.
IN A STATEMENT, U.S. DEFENSE
SECRETARY ASHTON CARTER CALLED
THE RAID A "SIGNIFICANT BLOW TO
ISIL" AND ADDED:
THE GROUND RAID COMES JUST AS
THE U.S. AND ITS ALLIES
CONDUCTED SIX AIR STRIKES IN
SYRIA AND 15 MORE IN IRAQ, ALL
TARGETING ISLAMIC STATE
FIGHTERS.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, IRAQI
GOVERNMENT FORCES SUFFERED A
SERIOUS SETBACK, LOSING CONTROL
OF RAMADI.
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS TOOK
OVER THE CITY FRIDAY AFTER A
WAVE OF SUICIDE BOMBINGS.
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE JOHN
BOEHNER SAID THAT WHILE HE'S
ENCOURAGED BY TODAY'S NEWS, HE
REMAINS "GRAVELY CONCERNED BY
ISIL'S ASSAULT ON RAMADI THAT
THREATENS THE STABILITY AND
SOVEREIGNTY OF IRAQ, WHICH IS
VITAL TO AMERICA'S INTERESTS."
FOR SOME PERSPECTIVE ON THE
RAID, I'M JOINED BY DOUG
OLLIVANT IN WASHINGTON D.C.
HE WAS THE DIRECTOR FOR IRAQ IN
THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL IN
THE BUSH AND OBAMA
ADMINISTRATIONS.
HE IS A SENIOR NATIONAL SECURITY
FELLOW AT THE NEW AMERICA
FOUNDATION AND A PARTNER AT
MANTID INTERNATIONAL.
SO, WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT THIS
INDIVIDUAL?
WHY WAS HE SUCH A HIGH-VALUE
TARGET?
>> THERE ARE MANY THINGS WE
DON'T KNOW ABOUT THIS
INDIVIDUAL.
NOW, PRESUMABLY, THE U.S.
INTELLIGENCE KNOWS THE FUNCTION
THAT HE IS PERFORMING IN THE
ORGANIZATION.
HE'S EVIDENTLY VERY TIED INTO
FINANCING, OIL SALES, AND THE
LIKE.
BUT EXACTLY WHO HE IS, WE'RE NOT
SURE.
ABU SAYYAF, HIS NICKNAME MEANING
"FATHER OF SAYYAF."
WE DON'T KNOW WHO SAYYAF IS.
PRESUMABLY HIS SON BUT WE DON'T
KNOW HOW OLD OR WHAT HE DOES.
WE SEEM CONFUSED WHERE HE COMES
FROM.
THE ADMINISTRAION SEEMS TO THINK
HE'S A TUNISIAN, BUT WE HAVE HAD
REPORTS OUT OF THE REGION SAYING
HE'S FROM MOSUL AND BEFORE THAT
FROM SAUDI ARABIA.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
INTERESTING THINGS I FOUND IS
THIS IS THE FIRST TIME I HEARD
ABOUT U.S. TROOPS ON THE GROUND
IN SYRIA, AND THEY WERE LAUNCHED
FROM IRAQ.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
SO THIS IS THE FIRST TIME THAT
WE KNOW OF THAT U.S. SPECIAL
FORCES HAVE GONE INTO SYRIA WITH
THE INTENT OF KILLING OR
CAPTURING ENEMY COMBATANTS.
WE KNOW THAT THERE WAS THE
ATTEMPTED RAID TO RESCUE
HOSTAGES, SUCH AS JAMES FOLEY
BEFORE.
THIS IS THE FIRST TIME THEY'VE
GONE FORWARD TO CONDUCT COMBAT
AND TRY TO KILL AND CAPTURE
PEOPLE.
AND IT WAS LAUNCHED FROM IRAQ.
IN THE PAST, IRAQ HAS BEEN VERY
CIRCUMSPECT ABOUT ALLOWING
ATTACKS TO BE LAUNCHED OUTSIDE
ITS BORDERS INTO ANOTHER
COUNTRY.
EVIDENTLY, THE EXISTENCE OF THE
ISLAMIC STATE HAS CHANGED THEIR
MIND ON THAT POINT.
>> Sreenivasan: CRITICS OF
THE ADMINISTRATION POINT OUT IS
THIS NOT A COINCIDENCE THAT THIS
NEWS IS HAPPENING AROUND THE
SAME TIME THAT RAMADI, A CITY IN
IRAQ, IS FALLING TO ISIS
FIGHTERS?
>> IT'S CERTAINLY CONVENIENT FOR
THE ADMINISTRATION THAT THE NEWS
IS TURNING TO THIS RAID RATHER
THAN THE VERY REAL DANGERS IN
RAMADI.
ON THE OTHER HAND, THE NEWS THIS
MORNING SEEMS TO BE THAT RAMADI
IS JUST A LITTLE BIT BETTER.
SOME BUILDINGS HAVE BEEN
RECOVERED IN THE CITY.
REINFORCEMENTS ARE FLOWING FROM
BAGHDAD, SO THERE'S A VERY REAL
CONTEST IN RAMADI, AND WE NEED
TO TAKE IT SERIOUSLY, AND THE
ISLAMIC STATE CLEARLY HAD SOME
GOOD DAYS THE PAST DAY OR TWO
BUT WE'LL ALSO SEE HOW RAMADI
ENDS UP.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE IS
ALSO THIS STORY LINE ON PALMYRA,
ANOTHER IMPORTANT SITE
CULTURALLY THAT IS THREATENED BY
ISIS' ADVANCE.
>> A VERY BEAUTIFUL SET OF ROMAN
RUINS.
I BELIEVE IT'S A UNESCO HERITAGE
SITE, AND IT'S BEING VERY MUCH
THREATENED BY ISIL AS WELL.
THIS IS ALSO IMPORTANT BECAUSE
WE'RE SEEING CONFLICT BETWEEN
THE SYRIAN REGIME, THE ASSAD
REGIME, AND ISIL DIRECTLY.
MANY PEOPLE HAVE POINTED OUT
THERE ARE MANY PLACE WHERE THE
TWO DON'T FIGHT EACH OTHER.
WELL, THERE IS A CASE WHERE THEY
ARE, AND PERHAPS WE'RE SEEING
THE DYNAMICS BETWEEN THE ASSAD
REGIME AND ISIL CHANGING AS
THEY'RE NOW IN COMBAT ON THIS
FRONT.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THIS LARGER
NARRATIVE, HOW IMPORTANT IS THE
KILLING OF ANY SINGLE INDIVIDUAL
IN THE LEADERSHIP RANKS?
>> LOOK, THE KILLING OF ANY
SINGLE INDIVIDUAL NEVER REALLY
MATTERS IN ANY ORGANIZATION.
WE'VE-- WE'VE HEARD HIM
DESCRIBED AS THE CHIEF FINANCIAL
OFFICER OF ISIL IN SYRIA.
IF YOU TAKE OUT THE CHIEF
FINANCIAL OFFICER OF ANY
CORPORATION IN AMERICA, HIS
JUNIOR, ONE OF HIS UNDERLINGS
WILL STEP UP, TAKE HIS PLACE,
STEP INTO THAT ROLE.
THE ISLAMIC STATE IS GOING TO DO
SOMETHING VERY, VERY SIMILAR.
THAT SAID, IT NEVER HURTS TO
TAKE OUT A SENIOR LEADER AND
IMPORTANTLY THE INTELLIGENCE
THAT WAS GATHERED FROM THIS
RAID, THE THINGS THAT HIS WIFE
KNOWS, THE DATA, THE LAPTOPS,
THE THUMB DRIVES-- ALL THIS
INTELLIGENCE THAT'S GATHERED IN
THE RAID MAY BE VERY IMPORTANT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DOUGLAS OLLIVANT, JOINING US
FROM WASHINGTON, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: INVESTIGATORS IN
THE DEADLY AMTRAK TRAIN
DERAILMENT IN PHILADELPHIA HAVE
CALLED IN F.B.I. EXPERTS TO
FIGURE OUT WHETHER SOMETHING
STRUCK THE LEFT SIDE OF THE
TRAIN'S WINDSHIELD BEFORE THE
ACCIDENT.
INVESTIGATORS REPORTEDLY FOUND
AN UNEXPLAINED, FIST-SIZED
INDENTATION IN THE GLASS.
THE NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY BOARD SAYS THERE'S WORD
ANOTHER REGIONAL TRAIN MIGHT
HAVE BEEN STRUCK BY SOME KIND OF
PROJECTILE, TOO.
INVESTIGATORS HAVE ALSO
QUESTIONED THE DERAILED TRAIN'S
ENGINEER, BUT HE TOLD THEM HE
DOESN'T REMEMBER ANYTHING THAT
HAPPENED AFTER HE LEFT NORTH
PHILADELPHIA ON TUESDAY.
THE BODIES OF THE EIGHT VICTIMS
HAVE BEEN RECOVERED.
MORE THAN 200 OTHERS ARE
RECUPERATING FROM INJURIES.
IN EGYPT, A COURT HAS SENTENCED
OUSTED PRESIDENT MOHAMMED MORSI
TO DEATH.
MORSI AND MORE THAN 100 OTHER
DEFENDANTS WERE CONVICTED OF
ESCAPING DURING A MASS JAILBREAK
IN 2011.
MORSI SUPPOSEDLY COLLUDED WITH
FOREIGNERS TO FREE ISLAMIC
MILITANTS.
HE'S CURRENTLY SERVING A 20-YEAR
PRISON TERM FOR ARRESTING AND
TORTURING PROTESTERS.
JUST WEEKS BEFORE MORSI TOOK
POWER IN 2012, HIS PREDECESSOR,
HOSNI MUBARAK, WAS SENTENCED TO
LIFE IN PRISON FOR ALLOWING
SECURITY FORCES TO KILL
PROTESTERS DURING THE "ARAB
SPRING."
THAT WAS LATER OVERTURNED.
IN NORTHEASTERN NEPAL, CREWS
HAVE RECOVERED THE BODIES OF ALL
EIGHT PEOPLE ON BOARD THE U.S.
HELICOPTER THAT CRASHED TUESDAY.
THE NEWS COMES JUST A DAY AFTER
SEARCH TEAMS FINALLY FOUND THE
MISSING CHOPPER IN A REMOTE AND
RUGGED AREA.
SIX OF THE VICTIMS WERE U.S.
MARINES.
TWO WERE NEPALISE SOLDIERS.
THEY HAD BEEN OUT ON A RELIEF
MISSION.
ALSO TODAY A MAGNITUDE 5.7 QUAKE
STRUCK NEPAL'S CAPITAL CITY.
AT LEAST 8,000 PEOPLE HAVE DIED
SINCE THE FIRST MAJOR QUAKE AND
AFTERSHOCKS SINCE APRIL 25.
IN SOUTHEAST ASIA, MYANMAR'S
GOVERNMENT SAYS IT IS NOT
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE MIGRANT BOAT
CRISIS STILL STRANDING THOUSANDS
OF REFUGEES.
MOST OF THE REFUGEES ARE
MUSLIMS FLEEING ETHNIC
PERSECUTION AND POVERTY IN
MYANMAR AND BANGLADESH.
MANY HAVE BEEN STRANDED AT SEA
FOR TWO MONTHS OR MORE, WITH
LITTLE FOOD OR WATER.
CREWS DID RESCUE ALMOST 800
PEOPLE YESTERDAY AFTER THEIR
BOAT CAPSIZED.
INDONESIA, MALAYSIA AND THAILAND
ARE TURNING AWAY THE BOATS, BUT
THAILAND IS HOSTING A SUMMIT AT
THE END OF THIS MONTH TO ADDRESS
THE CRISIS.
SO FAR, MYANMAR IS REFUSING TO
SEND ANY EMISSARIES.
1,200 MILES EAST OF THE ANDAMAN
SEA, CHINESE LEADERS ARE NOT
BACKING DOWN FROM CLAIMING
CONTROVERSIAL TERRITORY IN THE
SOUTH CHINA SEA, DESPITE U.S.
PRESSURE.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
MET WITH CHINA'S FOREIGN
MINISTER IN BEIJING TODAY,
HOPING TO REDUCE TENSION BETWEEN
CHINA AND SEVERAL OTHER NATIONS
WHICH BORDER ONE OF THE WORLD'S
BUSIEST SHIPPING ROUTES.
THE U.S. IS NOT TAKING AN
OFFICIAL POSITION ON THE
DISPUTE.
KERRY CALLED FOR A "DIPLOMATIC"
RESOLUTION.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
A SERIES OF DENGUE FEVER
OUTBREAKS IN FLORIDA IN THE LAST
FEW YEARS HAS RAISED CONCERNS
THAT THE THREAT OF THE MOSQUITO-
BORNE DISEASE MAY BE OUTPACING
MOSQUITO CONTROL EFFORTS.
IN THE FLORIDA KEYS, OFFICIALS
ARE CONSIDERING USING A DRAMATIC
NEW APPROACH-- RELEASING
GENETICALLY-MODIFIED MOSQUITOES
TO KILL OFF THE SPECIES THAT
CARRY DENGUE.
THE LAB-GROWN MOSQUITOES HAVE
BEEN TESTED IN BRAZIL AND IN THE
CAYMAN ISLANDS, BUT MANY KEYS
RESIDENTS WORRY THAT THEY WILL
BE LIVING IN THE MIDDLE OF AN
ONGOING EXPERIMENT.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE
REPORTS FROM FLORIDA.
>> Reporter: KEY WEST IS A PLACE
WHERE PEOPLE GENERALLY COME TO
RELAX, AND THE DRAW'S PRETTY
OBVIOUS-- WHITE SAND BEACHES,
QUAINT ARCHITECTURE, THE
WILDLIFE.
BUT RELAXING ISN'T ON JESSICA
BROWN'S AGENDA TODAY; SHE'S A
FIELD INSPECTOR WITH THE FLORIDA
KEYS MOSQUITO CONTROL DISTRICT.
AND SINCE IT RAINED YESTERDAY,
SHE'S GOT HER WORK CUT OUT FOR
HER.
>> GARBAGE CANS, AS LONG AS
THEY'RE TURNED OVER, THEY'LL BE
GOOD.
>> Reporter: THERE ARE 45
SPECIES OF MOSQUITO THAT THRIVE
IN THE OFTEN-HUMID FLORIDA KEYS.
BROWN'S JOB: PECK AROUND
PEOPLES' BACKYARDS, CLEAR OUT
STANDING WATER AND USE TINY
PELLETS AND EVEN LARVAE-GOBBLING
FISH TO KILL MOSQUITOES BEFORE
THEY TURN INTO ADULTS.
>> SO, MOSQUITOES COULD,
DEPENDING ON HOW LONG THE WATER
SITS, LAY THEIR EGGS, AND HAVE A
REALLY BIG PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: HER WORK'S PART OF
A $10 MILLION A YEAR EFFORT BY
THE KEYS MOSQUITO CONTROL
DISTRICT, WHICH COVERS ALL OF
MONROE COUNTY IN SOUTHERN
FLORIDA, TO KILL OFF AS MANY OF
THE FLYING BLOODSUCKERS AS
POSSIBLE BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT
JUST A NUISANCE.
>> HEALTH OFFICIALS FIND 39
CASES OF DENGUE FEVER IN THE
KEYS.
>> Reporter: IN 2009, AN
OUTBREAK OF A MOSQUITO-BORNE
DISEASE CALLED DENGUE FEVER
STRUCK THE FLORIDA KEYS, THE
FIRST LOCAL RESURGENCE OF THE
VIRUS SINCE THE 1940s.
>> DENGUE'S REALLY NASTY WHEN
YOU GET IT.
YOU KNOW, YOU GET A HIGH FEVER.
YOU GET A RASH ALL OVER.
BONE PAIN.
THEY CALL IT "BREAK BONE FEVER"
BECAUSE IT HURTS SO BAD.
>> Reporter: THERE WERE A FEW
DOZEN CASES AND NO FATALITIES,
BUT THE OUTBREAK PROMPTED
MOSQUITO CONTROL OFFICIALS IN
THE KEYS TO CONSIDER AN
EXPERIMENT THAT'S NEVER BEEN
TRIED IN THE U.S. BEFORE--
RELEASING POTENTIALLY MILLIONS
OF GENETICALLY-MODIFIED
MOSQUITOES TO KILL THE SPECIES
THAT CARRIES DENGUE AND OTHER
DANGEROUS DISEASES.
BUT THE IDEA OF GENETICALLY-
MODIFIED BUGS FLYING AROUND THIS
TRADITIONALLY FIERCELY
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY HAS MANY
RESIDENTS IN THE KEYS UP IN
ARMS.
>> WE ARE HUMANS, AND WE DON'T
LIKE BEING TREATED LIKE GUINEA
PIGS.
>> Reporter: PUBLIC MEETINGS
HERE IN THE KEYS HAVE EXPOSED A
DEEP DIVIDE BETWEEN MOSQUITO
CONTROL OFFICIALS AND SOME
RESIDENTS WHO WORRY THAT THE
GENETICALLY MODIFIED-- OR G.M.--
MOSQUITOES COULD SOMEHOW MAKE
THEM SICK.
>> I AM BEING TOLD WHAT TO DO.
>> Reporter: IS THERE ANY RISK
TO MY HEALTH IF I GET STUNG BY A
MOSQUITO WITH A GENETIC
MODIFICATION LIKE THIS?
>> THERE'S NO EVIDENCE OF ANY
RISK AT ALL AT THIS POINT.
>> Reporter: BUT "NO EVIDENCE OF
RISK" IS DIFFERENT FROM THE
PRESENCE OF RISK, RIGHT?
>> TRUE, TRUE.
>> Reporter: MICHAEL DOYLE IS
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF THE KEYS
MOSQUITO CONTROL DISTRICT AND
SAYS THE RISK OF DENGUE FEVER
FAR OUTWEIGHS ANY RISKS FROM
GENETICALLY MODIFIED MOSQUITOES.
>> THE LAST THING WE WANT PEOPLE
TO DO IS TO BE CONCERNED ABOUT
COMING DOWN HERE AND GETTING
SOMETHING.
AND SO, WE'RE DOING EVERYTHING
WE CAN TO MAKE SURE THAT NEVER
HAPPENS.
>> Reporter: THE MOSQUITOES THAT
CARRY DENGUE FEVER, CALLED AEDES
AEGYPTI, ARE TOUGH TO KILL.
THEY'RE IMMUNE TO MANY
INSECTICIDES AND BREED IN
SOMETIMES HARD TO REACH PLACES,
LIKE UNDERNEATH HOUSES OR IN THE
LEAVES OF PLANTS LIKE
BROMELIADS.
SO, INSTEAD OF SPRAYS OR PELLETS
THAT DON'T REACH THOSE PLACES,
OFFICIALS IN THE KEYS TURNED TO
A U.K. FIRM CALLED OXITEC.
THEIR SCIENTISTS HAVE DEVELOPED
A METHOD TO ALTER THE
MOSQUITOES' GENETIC CODE TO KILL
THEM OFF, OR AT LEAST KILL LOTS
OF THEM.
>> WE'VE INSERTED TWO GENES INTO
THIS MOSQUITO.
ONE GENE IS A SELF LIMITING
GENE, AND THE OTHER GENE IS A
MARKER.
NOW, THE MARKER CAN IDENTIFY
WHERE THESE GENES ARE INSERTED,
AND THE OTHER ONE IS THE ONE
THAT CAUSES THE OFFSPRING TO
DIE.
>> Reporter: SCIENTIST DERRIC
NIMMO OVERSEES OXITEC'S PROPOSED
KEYS TRIAL.
HE AND HIS COLLEAGUES ARE ABLE
TO TINKER WITH THE GENES OF MALE
MOSQUITOES.
>> THOSE MALES HAVE ONE JOB.
THEY GO AND FIND A FEMALE, AND
THEY PASS ON THEIR GENES.
AND THEY PASS ON THE OXITEC GENE
ALONG WITH THEIR OWN GENES.
NOW, THE OFFSPRING THAT INHERIT
THOSE GENES, THEY DIE.
AND IF YOU RELEASE ENOUGH OF THE
OXITEC MALES OVER A LONG ENOUGH
PERIOD OF TIME, YOU CAN GET A
CRASH OF THE MOSQUITO
POPULATION.
>> Reporter: OXITEC SAYS THEIR
METHOD IS BOTH EFFECTIVE AND
SAFE.
THEY'VE CONDUCTED SMALL STUDIES
IN THE CAYMAN ISLANDS, BRAZIL
AND PANAMA-- PLACES WHERE DENGUE
IS ENDEMIC-- AND WERE ABLE TO
REDUCE THE POPULATION OF
MOSQUITOES THAT CAN CARRY
DENGUE.
AND THEY SAY THOSE EXPERIMENTS
DIDN'T HARM ANYONE.
WITH THAT IN MIND, THE FIVE
ELECTED MOSQUITO CONTROL
OFFICIALS IN THE KEYS DECIDED TO
PURSUE THEIR OWN G.M. MOSQUITO
EXPERIMENT IN THE SMALL ISLAND
NEIGHBORHOOD OF KEY HAVEN.
AND OXITEC AGREED TO CONDUCT THE
TRIAL FOR FREE, A TRIAL THAT HAS
YET TO BEGIN.
INITIALLY, FLORIDA KEYS
BUSINESSPERSON MILA DE MIER SAYS
THAT ALL SOUNDED GREAT TO HER.
>> I SAY, "WOW, THIS IS
FANTASTIC!
THIS IS A REALLY, REALLY GREAT
IDEA.
BE ABLE TO FIGHT MOSQUITOES WITH
ANOTHER MOSQUITOES?
WHAT A GREAT CONCEPT!"
AND, OBVIOUSLY, I DON'T LIKE
MOSQUITOES BITING MY KIDS OR MY
DOGS.
>> Reporter: BUT DE MIER SAYS
THE MORE SHE CONSIDERED IT, SHE
FELT THE SCIENCE WAS TOO NEW,
AND NOT ENOUGH WAS KNOWN FOR HER
TO FEEL COMFORTABLE WITH G.M.
MOSQUITOES IN HER COMMUNITY,
DESPITE OXITEC'S SAFETY
ASSURANCES.
DE MIER STARTED AN ONLINE
PETITION AGAINST THE MOSQUITO
TRIAL THAT'S GATHERED 150,000
SIGNATURES FROM AROUND THE
WORLD.
>> I DO NOT WANT MY KIDS TO BE
LABORATORY RATS.
I DON'T WANT MY KIDS TO BE
GUINEA PIGS.
WHY?
BECAUSE THIS IS A BRAND NEW
TECHNOLOGY.
YOU GET THESE MOSQUITOES, YOU
RELEASE ONCE AND FOR ALL, AND
THEN LET'S EXPERIMENT TO SEE
WHAT HAPPENS.
>> Reporter: UNIVERSITY OF
FLORIDA PROFESSOR PHIL LOUNIBOS
HAS STUDIED MOSQUITOES AND THE
DISEASES THEY CARRY FOR OVER 40
YEARS.
HE'S NOT INVOLVED WITH THE
PROPOSED G.M. EXPERIMENT IN THE
KEYS.
>> WE BELIEVE, THOSE OF US WHO
HAVE WORKED WITH MOSQUITOES,
THAT THE PROBABILITY OF
SOMETHING GOING WRONG IS NOT
VERY HIGH.
>> Reporter: LOUNIBOS IS
CONVINCED THE TRIAL WOULD BE
SAFE, BUT HE QUESTIONS ITS
EFFECTIVENESS.
HE SAYS OTHER MOSQUITO SPECIES
CAN CARRY DENGUE, AND THE LOCAL
BUGS COULD EVOLVE TO OUTSMART
THE GENETICALLY MODIFIED MALES.
>> IN THE ABSENCE OF DENGUE, THE
ABSENCE OF A REALLY SIGNIFICANT
THREAT OF DENGUE, I SEE THE
OXITEC IMPLEMENTATION IN THE
KEYS IN THE CONTEXT OF STRONG
PUBLIC OPPOSITION TO BE
INAPPROPRIATE.
>> Reporter: GLOBALLY, DENGUE
HAS SURGED 30-FOLD IN THE PAST
50 YEARS, AND INCREASED TRAVEL
FROM ENDEMIC AREAS ALONG WITH
WARMER TEMPERATURES MEANS THE
THREAT IS SPREADING.
I ASKED DE MIER WHAT MIGHT
HAPPEN IF SHE BLOCKS THE TRIAL
AND THERE'S ANOTHER, MORE
SERIOUS DENGUE OUTBREAK IN THE
KEYS.
DO YOU WORRY THAT SOMEONE WOULD
CALL YOU UP AND SAY, "MILA, YOU
STOOD IN THE WAY.
YOU DID THIS"?
DO YOU... DO YOU WORRY ABOUT
THAT?
>> NO.
>> Reporter: WHY?
>> NO, BECAUSE, TO BE HONEST
WITH YOU, I THINK THE... THAT
PEOPLE HAVE TO AGREE.
AND AT THIS POINT, AGAIN, WE ARE
FREE OF DENGUE FOR FIVE YEARS.
WE ARE, I THINK, AS A CITIZEN,
AS A MOTHER AND A TAXPAYER, I
THINK THESE ARE MY RIGHTS, AND
THE WHOLE COMMUNITY'S RIGHT TO
CHOOSE.
DO WE WANT TO BE PART OF THESE
TESTS OR NO?
>> Reporter: DID YOU EVER THINK,
"MAYBE WE SHOULD JUST GO OUT AND
GET EVERYBODY IN KEY HAVEN TO
JUST SIGN A PIECE OF PAPER THAT
SAYS 'I'M OKAY WITH THIS'"?
>> EVERY PERSON?
NO.
BECAUSE THERE'S NO WAY YOU CAN
GET 100% OF PEOPLE TO AGREE TO
ANYTHING.
THAT'S, YOU KNOW, PUTTING IN A
ROAD, PUTTING A BRIDGE.
YOU'VE GOT SOMEONE WHO'S GOING
TO DISAGREE WITH IT.
>> Reporter: THE F.D.A.'S CENTER
FOR VETERINARY MEDICINE, WHICH
APPROVES ANY GENETIC
MODIFICATIONS TO ANIMALS, WILL
HAVE THE FINAL SAY OVER WHETHER
OR NOT THE OXITEC MOSQUITO TRIAL
IN THE FLORIDA KEYS PROCEEDS.
AN F.D.A. SPOKESPERSON TOLD US
THERE'S NO TIMELINE FOR WHEN
THAT MIGHT HAPPEN.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR A CLOSER
LOOK AT HOW SCIENTISTS ARE
GENETICALLY MODIFYING
MOSQUITOES, WATCH THE VIDEO ON
OUR FACEBOOK PAGE AT
www.facebook/com/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR 15 YEARS,
THE U.S.' WAR ON DRUGS IN
COLOMBIA HAS RELIED ON CROP
DUSTING TO KILL THE PLANTS USED
TO PRODUCE COCAINE.
BUT THIS WEEK, COLUMBIA'S
GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCED IT'S
PHASING OUT THE U.S.-LED
PROGRAM.
SO, HOW WILL THIS SHIFT IN
POLICY AFFECT THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN THE TWO COUNTRIES?
JOINING ME VIA SKYPE FROM
BOGOTA, COLOMBIA, IS JUAN
FORERO, THE SOUTH AMERICAN
BUREAU CHIEF FOR THE "WALL
STREET JOURNAL."
SO GIVE US A LITTLE BIT OF
BACKGROUND FOR PEOPLE JUST
WAKING UP TO THIS STORY.
WHAT IS THE PROGRAM WE'VE BEEN
DOING AND WHY HAS IT BEEN SO
IMPORTANT?
>> IT WAS 15 YEARS AGO WHAT WAS
CALLED "PLAN COLOMBIA" WHICH WAS
A U.S. FUNDED PROGRAM BEGAN AND
IT BASICALLY ENTAILED USING CROP
DUSTERS TO HIT COCA.
THIS WAS A VERY CONTROVERSIAL
PROGRAM WHEN IT BEGAN.
THERE WAS A LOT OF CRITICISM,
BUT THIS WAS APPROVED IN THE
BILL CLINTON ADMINISTRATION AND
IT WAS 15 YEARS AGO, IT WAS IN
DECEMBER OF 2000, WHEN CROP
DUSTERS HIT INDUSTRIALIZED
FIELDS OF COCA ACROSS COLOMBIA.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, THE CHEMICAL
BEING USED TO KEEP THE COCA DOWN
COULD POSSIBLY CAUSE CANCER.
IS THAT RIGHT?
>> EXACTLY.
THERE IS A RESEARCH ARM OF THE
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION WHICH
SAID IT COULD POSSIBLY CAUSE
CANCER IN HUMANS.
SO THAT CAUSED QUITE A
CONTROVERSY HERE IN COLOMBIA,
ALTHOUGH THERE HAD BEEN
CRITICISM ABOUT FUMIGATION FOR
MANY, MANY YEARS.
I THINK PART OF THE ISSUE
THOUGH, PART OF THE REASON, THE
BIG PART OF THE REASON WHY
THIS IS FINALLY COMING TO A
CLOSE IS BECAUSE OF POLITICAL
REASONS.
IN OTHER WORDS, THIS THING JUST
SERVED ITS CYCLE.
IT DID WHAT IT HAD TO DO IN THE
MINDS OF SOME, AND NOW IT'S TIME
TO TRY SOMETHING ELSE AND THAT'S
BECAUSE OF NEW POLITICAL
REALITIES IN COLOMBIA.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT ARE
THE ALTERNATIVES HERE TO
SPRAYING?
PEOPLE WHO COULD MANUALLY
ERADICATE ALL THESE CROPS,
SOME OF THOSE SOLDIERS HAVE DIED
BECAUSE THEY STEPPED ON LAND
MINES.
>> LOOK, IT'S PRETTY HORRIFIC.
YOU HAVE HAD ABOUT 200 DEATHS
OVER THE LAST 10 YEARS, AND MOST
OF THOSE ARE SOLDIERS.
SOME OF THOSE ARE CIVILIANS
PAID TO ERADICATE.
AND THAT'S BECAUSE OF THE LAND
MINES IN THOSE FIELD.
THAT'S BASICALLY ALMOST STOPPED
MANUAL ERADICATION.
BUT REALLY THE ANSWER TO
RESOLVING THE COCA ISSUE IS
BRINGING THE STATE INTO SOME OF
THESE REGIONS.
COLOMBIA IS A VERY LARGE
COUNTRY.
IT'S ABOUT TWICE THE SIZE OF
FRANCE.
AND YOU HAVE ALL THESE FAR-FLUNG
REGIONS THAT REALLY AREN'T PART
OF THE STATE.
THE STATE NEEDS TO BRING IN
ROADS AND HOSPITALS AND SCHOOLS.
THERE REALLY ARE TWO COLOMBIAS.
YOU NEED TO BRING IN THE STATE
AND ALMOST EVERYBODY ACTUALLY
PRO FUMIGATION, ANTI-FUMIGATION,
IS IN AGREEMENT WITH THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHAT
HAPPENS TO THE FARMERS THAT SEEM
TO BE CAUGHT IN THE MIDDLE HERE?
ON THE ONE HAND YOU'VE GOT
GOVERNMENT SAYING DON'T GROW
COCA.
ON THE OTHER HAND YOU HAVE THE
REBELS WHO SOMETIMES MAKE THEIR
MONEY OFF OF THE COCAINE
INDUSTRY.
>> YEAH, EXACTLY.
THE OTHER DAY I WAS TALKING TO A
LOT OF THESE FARMERS AND I KNOW
THEM BECAUSE I HAD BEEN THERE A
FEW MONTHS BEFORE IN A
PARTICULAR AREA WHERE I'M SEEING
MORE COCA, AND SOME OF THESE
FARMERS ARE SAYING, LOOK, THE
GUERILLAS ARE TELLING US TO GROW
COCA AND WHEN THE GUERRILLAS ARE
TELLING TO YOU GROW COCA, THAT'S
PRESSURE TACTICS.
THEY DEFINITELY ARE CAUGHT IN
THE MIDDLE, IF THEY GROW THEY
HAVE THE SPRAY PLANES COME OR
ERADICATORS COME AND IF THEY
DON'T GROW THEY COULD BE IN A
BIND WITH THE PEOPLE WHO COUNT
ON THAT COCA FOR MONEY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WHAT IS THAT
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE U.S.
AND COLOMBIA LIKE IN THE CONTEXT
OF THIS, AND YOU ALSO SAID
THERE ARE NEW POLITICAL
REALITIES ON THE GROUND?
>> I THINK OVER THIS THEY
CLASHED BECAUSE I THINK THE
COUNTER-DRUG OFFICIALS IN THE
U.S. GOVERNMENT ARE VERY MUCH
WHOLEHEARTEDLY SUPPORTIVE OF
FUMIGATION, SO THEY DIDN'T WANT
IT TO END.
BUT THE POLITICAL REALITIES ARE
DIFFERENT IN COLOMBIA.
WHEN THIS PROGRAM BEGAN,
COLOMBIA WAS IN A REALLY, REALLY
TOUGH STATE.
CERTAINLY, THE COLOMBIA THAT YOU
HAVE TODAY 15 YEARS LATER IS A
DIFFERENT COUNTRY.
IT'S VERY DYNAMIC, A GROWING
ECONOMY.
THERE'S A LOT OF GOOD THINGS
THAT ARE HAPPENING HERE.
AND RIGHT NOW, ONE OF THE BIG
THINGS THAT'S HAPPENING IS THAT
THE GOVERNMENT IS IN THE MIDST
OF PEACE TALKS WITH THE
GUERILLAS.
THAT WOULD END A VERY LONG
CONFLICT.
AND THE GOVERNMENT'S POINT OF
VIEW IS FUMIGATION IS REALLY A
KIND OF MILITARISTIC APPROACH IN
REGIONS THAT ARE NOW PEACEFUL.
WHAT THEY WANT TO DO IS WIN
HEARTS AND MINDS AND YOU DON'T
DO THAT BY FUMIGATING THEM, BY
DROPPING DEFOLIANT ON TOP OF
THESE PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
JUAN FORERO,THE SOUTH AMERICAN
BUREAU CHIEF OF THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL" JOINING US VIA SKYPE
FROM BOGOTA, COLOMBIA, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, IT WAS A PLEASURE.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S. IS IN
THE GRIP OF THE WORST BIRD FLU
EPIDEMIC IN THE NATION'S
HISTORY.
THE OUTBREAK IS CREATING A
CRISIS FOR FARMERS: HOW TO
SAFELY DESTROY INFECTED BIRDS
AND HOW TO KEEP EGG PRICES FROM
SKYROCKETING IN THE PROCESS.
EARLIER, I SPOKE WITH ASSOCIATED
PRESS REPORTER DAVID PITT VIA
SKYPE FROM DES MOINES, IOWA.
DAVID, JUST A COUPLE OF WEEKS
AGO WE WERE TALKING ABOUT HOW
BAD THIS WAS, BUT IT HASN'T
GOTTEN ANY BETTER.
>> RIGHT, IT DOES STILL SEEM TO
BE SPREADING.
THE HARDEST HIT STATES ARE
MINNESOTA, WHERE MOST-- YOU
KNOW, A LOT OF THE TURKEYS IN
THE UNITED STATES ARE RAISED,
AND IOWA, THE LEADING
EGG-PRODUCING STATE.
SO BOTH STATES HAVE SEEN
INCREASED CASES IN THE LAST FEW
DAYS.
SO WE ARE SEEING IT SPREAD,
STILL, AND THE PRIORITY, I
THINK, FOR THOSE WHO STUDY THIS
PROBLEM IS TO TRY TO FIGURE OUT
HOW TO KEEP IT FROM SPREADING
AND HOW IT IS SPREADING, AND
THEN STOP IT, IF POSSIBLE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE THE
THE MARKET EFFECTS NOW?
THIS HAS JUST GONE ON LONG
ENOUGH.
ARE WE SEEING PRICES INCREASE?
>> WE ARE.
THE LAST STORY I DID A FEW DAYS
AGO REFLECTED CARTON EGG PRICES
GOING UP ABOUT 17% OR SO IN THE
MIDWEST.
THE BIGGEST IMPACT SO FAR HAS
BEEN EGGS USED FOR INGREDIENTS
IN THINGS LIKE MAYONNAISE AND
CAKE MIXES AND THOSE KINDS OF
THINGS.
THAT MARKET HAS SEEN A LITTLE
OVER 60% INCREASE.
>> Sreenivasan: GIVE ME SOME
PERSPECTIVE.
WHEN WE SAY THE LARGEST OF AVIAN
FLU OUTBREAK IN THE COUNTRY'S
HISTORY, HOW BAD IS THIS?
>> IN IOWA WE HAVE ABOUT 26
MILLION BIRDS.
23 MILLION OF THOSE ARE THE TYPE
THAT LAY EGGS.
THE ENTIRE COUNTRY HAS ABOUT 300
MILLION CHICKENS LAYING EGGS.
IT'S A SMALL PERCENTAGE OF THE
TOTAL BUT IT IS GETTING TO THE
POINT WHERE WE ARE SEEING AN
IMPACT ON THE MARKET AND
AVAILABILITY OF THE PRODUCT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DAVID PITT OF THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: TO SEE THE FULL
INTERVIEW, VISIT
www.newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: BEFORE WE
LEAVE YOU TONIGHT, FEDERAL
OFFICIALS ARE NOW ORDERING
AMTRAK TO USE COMPUTERIZED SPEED
RESTRICTIONS IN MORE TRAINS IN
THE WAKE OF TUESDAY'S DEADLY
DERAILMENT.
THE FEDERAL RAILROAD
ADMINISTRATION ISSUED THE
EMERGENCY ORDER TODAY REQUIRING
AMTRAK TO AUTOMATICALLY NOTIFY
AN ENGINEER IF THEY'RE SPEEDING
AND APPLY THE BRAKES IF THE
ENGINEER DOES NOT RESPOND.
AMTRAK IS ALSO BEING ORDERED TO
REEVALUATE THE SPEED LIMIT ON
EVERY CURVE BETWEEN BOSTON AND
WASHINGTON, D.C.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.